The nation of numerical identity
twice in this course. Once we're
thinking about sense and
reference. And here again in the
context of thinking about
personal identity. We want to
get a clear focus on the
notion because any confusion
here is going to throw us off
completely in thinking about
personal identity.
Now Olson gives us a warning.
I think this is true. He says
few concepts have been the
source of more
misunderstanding than
identity. Overtime the
persistence question. That's
our question about personal
identity is often confused
with other questions or stated
in a tendentious way that's
true. Now you want to avoid
doing that in order to focus
on the issue that matters.
So you know that our theme is
what's necessary for your
personal survival, and you know
that we are formulating that in
the way that Olson does. Were
saying that if a person exists
at one time, and I think exists
at another time, under what
possible circumstances is it
the case that The thing is the
person great? Good question.
Now let's be really careful
here. So first we're going to
distinguish between qualitative
similarity and numerical
identity.
So I drive onto campus. In the
olden days I drive onto campus
in my shiny new car. I'm very
proud of my car. It's a red car.
It's made by Toyota and it's a
Toyota and you drive onto the
campus in your shiny new car and
we're very pleased with your son
and you, can you say, Steve,
that is the exact same car as
mine. You and I are cars are
identical, and that's true. We
bought them. There was made
completely same specification,
right? Or you might look at my
shirt and you might say, Steve,
my dad's got that shirt. His
shirt is identical to yours.
But you don't of course mean
that your dad, shirt and my
shirt and one in the same right
there numerically, identical
just as our cars are numerically
identical, you drive yours. I
drive mine. I wear my shirt, you
wear yours. What you mean is
that they have a lot of
properties in common. Their
qualitatively similar there may
even be qualitatively
indistinguishable. That's to say
there's no property at all that
they have that allows us to
distinguish one from another. If
we swap shirts without knowing
it, we wouldn't know would never
be able to solve that
qualitatively indistinguishable
yes, numerically identical, no.
How do we know? Because there
are two. There are two. I don't
know if you can see my fingers
here. I'm doing this with my
fingers. He go. There are two so
I'm going to do like to see.
So that's one distinction,
right? Qualitative similarity
doesn't amount to numerical
identity, their distinct
notions. What we're concerned
with is thinking about personal
identity is numerical identity,
I think. Another key
distinction is between having
an identity and numerical
identity. So when people talk
loosely about identity, they
often mean something which is
quite different from.
It doesn't involve the notion of
numerical identity at all.
Let's illustrate that. So here's
the comedian, Sacha Baron Cohen.
Why is the actual heartbeat so
old fashion? You know, Boom,
Boom, Boom, Boom, Boom, Boom.
Now he's a comic genius Sacha
Baron Cohen, and he has of
course a number of identity's as
we might put it right here. He
is as Ali G. Elsewhere. You can
see him as Borat and so on.
I was going to show you Eddie is
it who is another of my
favourites. And then I realized
that the Eddie is it doesn't
have a number of identity's.
Eddie Eddie is it just seems to
be himself right which is lovely
and wonderful so. Here we have
someone where you might say
look there are multiple
identities involved, but this
isn't an issue about numerical
identity. Here we're using the
term identity in a very loose
weight. Means something like,
you know multiple persona or
multiple fictional persons,
multiple characters. He can
play multiple characters and
there are of course people who.
Live their lives as multiple
different characters. You might
say multiple people, but of
course the point of this is that
the there is really one person,
right? That's why it's dramatic
and interesting. There's one
person might be surprising who
is both Ali G and Borat and.
Sacha Baron Cohen and you could
be really quite surprised to
discover that. So the issue that
we were interested in personal
identity as the issue about
numerical identity, the unity.
That underpins all of those
different persona or what you
might, loosely speaking call
identity's. Here's one more
example of this. So famously I
believe this is true. Famously,
Superman and Clark Kent are one
and the same, but to many people
it seems like there are quite
different. Things involved
there, right? Superman is
something quite different from
Clark Kent. This sort of rather
mild office worker.
So if you like, we've got two
different personalities but one
person, you might be tempted to
say, well, there are two
identities there, right? He
identifies as Superman, and as
Clark Kent separately, but
that's not an issue for us about
personal identity. We're not
interested in that at all, so
our focus. Is on the notion
of personal identity.
And then think about
personal identity. I'm
saying we're thinking about
numerical identity.
But just here we run into a
problem. Problem is very simple.
David Lewis says he had famous
metaphysician. I'm sure you're
going to come across him again.
David Lewis says identity is
utterly simple and
unproblematic. Everything
is identical to itself.
Nothing is ever identical
to anything except itself.
There is never any problem about
what makes something identical
to itself. Nothing can ever fail
to be. And there is never any
problem about what makes two
things identical. Two things can
never be identical. So just
here I think we face an
awkward dilemma.
I want to understand the
question about personal
identity.
So I have to understand the is
when we ask under what
circumstances is it the case
that the person is the thing.
I gotta understand it is
there. Now I know that this
isn't a matter of two things
being qualitatively similar,
and I know they can't be a
matter of there being kind of
different persona or different
characters that The thing is
playing right? So when is Ali
G. Borat never right as far as
the characters go, those are
two separate characters.
So I think there is a separate
issue, so I want to understand
this in terms of numerical
identity, but what Lewis says
seems to me right. Identity is
utterly simple and
unproblematic, they just can't
be questions about when two
things are identical under what
circumstances there identical
after all, if they are too.
Then they're not identical.
And if there's just one thing,
well, it can never fail to be
identical to itself, so there's
no issue there as well. So now I
face a dilemma. I'm not
completely convinced I
understand this question about
personal identity. I think
Olssons Formulation is good.
We should hold onto it. I'm
not suggesting we reject it,
but I am suggesting that
something that we don't fully
understand here seems like it
must be a question about
numerical identity.
But if it's a question about
numerical identity.
It kind of has to be a trivial
question. Ouch.